# Protein Sequence Variability Prediction
This project investigates the protein sequence variability prediction using machine learning methods.

# Motivation 
Proteins are complexes of varying size, structure and function that enables essentially all biological processes in every organism.
They are linear polymers of a combination of monomer units called amino acids. The sequence of amino acids in turn, folds and adopts into a 3-D structure of the overall protein through various chemical interactions and bonds between them. 

During the protein folding process it is crucial the right structure is maintained in the organism, as misfolding of proteins could result in having wrong dynamics and in turn changing the protein function which can lead to diseases or have impact on the health of the cell.

Therefore, understanding the interaction between amino acid sequences with their corresponding three-dimensional structure and in turn, determining protein functions would be a significant breakthrough for researchers as it would offer endless possibilities for customised proteins. This revolution would be able to address several important challenges that society faces in the fields of biomedicine, for example in-silico rational drug design.

One of the challenges currently faced in protein modelling is the enormous search space, which results in a computationally NP-hard problem [Pierce and Winfree, 2002].

Extensive physics-based molecular dynamics (MD) refinement simulations are performed to sample a broad number of diverse conformations to develop improved models. Although many advancements have been made in this area of research, the most challenging problem remains the ability to identify superior quality configurations from this time-series trajectory.

This research project focuses on addressing some of the challenges currently faced in the field of protein design by trying to learn and predict the variability of the positions in an amino acid sequence where structural changes can be made to alter the protein function, while preserving also the correct folding without causing diseases within the organism, given the data on the protein dynamics and the data on the composition of a protein in different organisms.

# Methods 

## Multiple Sequence Alignment - data on the coposition of protein 
Protein homogeneity between organisms can be studied with Multiple Sequence Alignment tools to find evolutionary relationships between genes. This method is often utilised to identify sequence areas which are preserved throughout groups of sequences hypothesised to be evolutionary. 

## Molecular Dynamic Simulation - data on the proteins movements
Molecular simulation methods are utilised to simulate and analyse physical movements of atoms and molecules. Amongst many techniques one is of particular interest for the purpose of this research, that is Molecular Dynamic, as it provides dynamical properties needed. Simulating proteins using all-atom molecular dynamic method affects its applicability as is results very costly thus, dynamical properties of the protein can be obtained simulating the simplified version of the protein, Coarse-grained models.

## Data Collection Process
The data collection and some preparation process for the analysis has been done in collaboration with members of the Computational Biology lab of Brunel University London. 
The main source of data used to gain knowledge involving protein structure is the “Protein Data Bank”. The sequence alignment data was generated by the lab team using a specific software named HHBlits, which essentially uses hidden Markov models (HMMs) to search protein sequences and provides very fast results by HMM-HMM alignment. The lab team has run molecular-dynamic simulations software GROMACS using a coarse-grained force field called SIRAH. 
The Root-mean square fluctuation (RMSF) [Raschka, 2014] is calculated from the coordinates of the simulation, which essentially provides compressed information of the protein dynamics. The RMSF measures the deviation of the coarse-grained model position with respect to a reference coordinates over time
